[CEP XXXX] Standardize conda environment directory structure (#124)
conda/ceps: cep-XXXX.md

### General contents

The rest of the environment is generally populated by the contents of its installed packages, after extraction and linking. As a result, the structure is arbitrary and determined by which packages are installed. That said, there are some conventions that SHOULD be followed by package builders so the environments are populated consistently.

On Unix filesystems, packages generally follow a subset of the [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard):

- `./bin/`: executables and scripts.
- `./etc/`: configuration files.
- `./include/`: header files.
- `./lib/`: dynamic and static libraries.
- `./share/`: miscellaneous data contents.

On Windows, the expected directory structure is:

- `./Lib/`: `.lib` files.
- `./Library/`: Unix-style contents, as above.
- `./Scripts/`: Executables (`.exe`, `.bat`) and DLLs.
- Some binaries might be present in the root level, like `python.exe`.

> 

Author: Yes, you are probably right. I only wrote this section to have something to iterate on. Really hoping to capitalize on Cunningham's law for this part :P I am also aware of some initiatives to "rebuild the world" on Windows (cc @h-vetinari) and get rid of this distinction, but as things stand today, we are not there yet.

> 

Reviewer: > Cunningham's law 

That is typically a safe bet!

> 

Reviewer 2: > I am also aware of some initiatives to "rebuild the world" on Windows (cc @h-vetinari) and get rid of this distinction, but as things stand today, we are not there yet.

For reference: https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge.github.io/issues/2295

Although the `Library/` portion has always irked me, I shouldn't take credit for the idea to remove it. It's something that I saw on @SylvainCorlay's wishlist of longterm improvements that he had discussed with me, and it naturally came back up in the context of "what if we had to rebuild all of conda-forge anyway".

I'm almost sad the MSVC vNext ABI break still didn't materialize - not for the enormous amount of work this would cause initially of course, but for all the clean-up opportunities that would come along with it (and of course, it'd be important for the C++ ecosystem on many fronts).

> 

Reviewer: I was a bit nerd sniped by this, but it seems that `lib` is also used by NodeJs, R and ruby `noarch: generic` packages to install files that on Windows end up in `$CONDA_PREFIX/lib` and not in `$CONDA_PREFIX/Library/lib`, see https://github.com/search?q=org%3Aconda-forge+noarch%3A+generic&type=code .

> (Btw, pretty impressive ChatGPT output!)

Yes, I feel that it is easy to forget how powerful are agentic models with web search, as long as you give them a few minutes.

> Although the Library/ portion has always irked me, I shouldn't take credit for the idea to remove it. It's something that I saw on @SylvainCorlay's wishlist of longterm improvements that he had discussed with me, and it naturally came back up in the context of "what if we had to rebuild all of conda-forge anyway".

Definitely OT, but I think there are a couple things that could be done to reduce the annoyance induced by `/Library` on Windows even without a full rebuild:

* It would be cool to have conda tools define a `CONDA_INSTALL_PREFIX` (or some smarter name) env variable, defined as `$CONDA_PREFIX` on non-Windows and as `%CONDA_PREFIX%\Library` on Windows, to avoid the need to redefined everywhere the logic on how to define the "default install prefix" whenever you need it.
* it would be cool to have `noarch: install_prefix` packages that install their content in`$CONDA_PREFIX` on non-Windows and as `%CONDA_PREFIX%\Library` on Windows, to have all sort of noarch packages working out of the box for configuration files, resources, C++ header-only libraries (similar to what was discussed in https://github.com/conda/conda/issues/6978 and https://github.com/conda/conda-build/issues/2725).

Even if these changes do not require a full rebuild, they still require a non-trivial amount of work to implement.

> 

Author: > I was a bit nerd sniped by this, but it seems that `lib` is also used by NodeJs, R and ruby [...]

Wow, Ruby itself installs to `$CONDA_PREFIX` directly: https://conda-metadata-app.streamlit.app/?q=conda-forge%2Fwin-64%2Fruby-3.4.2-h79e22a9_0.conda. I'll add some more examples because it doesn't seem to be Python vs everything else. Thanks!

> 

Reviewer 2: > Definitely OT, but I think there are a couple things that could be done to reduce the annoyance induced by `/Library` on Windows even without a full rebuild:

I think this is mostly papering over the problem, in that it just shifts the confusion/surprise elsewhere ("wait, was it supposed to `CONDA_PREFIX` or `CONDA_INSTALL_PREFIX`?"). But yeah, without a full rebuild, this is probably the best we can do. 🤷 

(there are places where we need to install stuff twice, e.g. both `CONDA_PREFIX` as well as `LIBRARY_PREFIX`, because different bits and pieces look in different paths. Feedstocks that come to mind are zlib and compiler-rt.)

> 

Author: I've moved this bit of the discussion [to another CEP PR](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/133), where I think it fits better. Thank you all for the comments!

- `PKG_VERSION`: Version of the package.
- `PKG_BUILDNUM`: Build number of the package.

### Top-level `condarc` files

This can be used to configure behavior of the conda client performing operations on this environment. The following locations are recognized as valid configuration sources.

- `./.condarc`
- `./condarc`
- `./condarc.d/*.yml`
- `./condarc.d/*.yaml`

## Management of a conda environment

### Creating a conda environment

An empty directory `$CONDA_PREFIX` can be turned into a conda environment by creating an empty `conda-meta/history` file. The conda client MAY register this location into a central registry of environments, such as `~/.conda/environments.txt`.

The command used to create that environment MAY be recorded in `conda-meta/history`, along with the version, timestamp and details of the transaction.

### Installing packages

For each package to be installed, assuming it has been already downloaded and extracted:

- For regular (non-`noarch: python`) packages, place the contents of the artifact into `$CONDA_PREFIX`.
  - If the file contains a prefix placeholder, replace it with the value of `$CONDA_PREFIX` and copy the file.

>   - Otherwise, link into `$CONDA_PREFIX` (or copy if linking is not possible).

Reviewer 3: Should this call out tools being able to provide user a configuration to disable hard linking in favor of copying (or soft links). Conda has this behavior configurable.

> - For `noarch: python` packages, the contents of the artifact MUST be linked or copied under `$CONDA_PREFIX/lib/pythonX.Y` (Unix, where `X.Y` represents the MAJOR.MINOR Python version) or `$CONDA_PREFIX/Lib` (Windows). If the package contains `entry_points`, the necessary scripts MUST be generated under `$CONDA_PREFIX/bin` (Unix) or `$CONDA_PREFIX/Scripts` (Windows).

Reviewer 3: For `noarch: python` packages only the files in the `site-packages` directory are linked/copied into the site-packages directory. Other files are linked/copies into the prefix in the location they appear in the package.

Also CEP-19 comes into play for the location of the site-packages directory. It is not always lib/pythonX.Y/site-packages (unix) or Lib/site-packages (Windows)

Author: Changed this part to refer to CEP 20.

                "file_mode": str, // optional; one of 'text' or 'binary'
                "no_link": bool, // optional, whether to force copy or allow link
                "path_type": str, // one of: softlink, hardlink, directory; MAY also be one of generated types: pyc_file, unix_python_entry_point, windows_python_entry_point_script, windows_python_entry_point_exe, linked_package_record
                "prefix_placeholder": str, // optional; to be replaced with $CONDA_PREFIX
                "sha256": str, // optional if generated, 64-char hex string of file in cache
                "sha256_in_prefix": str, // optional if generated, 64-char hex string of file in prefix (after placeholder has been replaced)
                "size_in_bytes": int // optional, if generated
            },
            ...
            ]
        "paths_version": 1
    },
    "requested_spec": str, // MatchSpec asked by user; use "None" if not requested (transitive)
    "sha256": str, // 64-char hex string
    "size": int, // in bytes
    "subdir": str, // one of KNOWN_SUBDIRS
    "timestamp": int, // in ms
    "url": str, // download URL of the package
    "version": str, // package version
}
```

> The serialized `PrefixRecord` information SHOULD match the relevant fields in the most up-to-date repodata information available for the package (`depends` and `constrains` are of particular importance due to repodata patching). This is generally the channel's `repodata.json`, but it MAY also be an alternative source like the serialized metadata in a lockfile. The package's `info/index.json` MAY be used as a fallback if no other sources are available.

Reviewer 3: > but it MAY also be an alternative source like the serialized metadata in a lockfile

I would like to see this change to a MUST requirement when the metadata is provided in a lockfile. IMHO providing static reliable metadata is one of the key reasons for a lockfile in conda.

Author: I think the MUST/SHOULD distinction should come earlier in the paragraph, as in:
```suggestion
The serialized `PrefixRecord` information MUST match the relevant fields in the most up-to-date repodata information available for the package (`depends` and `constrains` are of particular importance due to repodata patching). This is generally the channel's `repodata.json`, but it MAY also be an alternative source like the serialized metadata in a lockfile. The package's `info/index.json` MAY be used as a fallback if no other sources are available.
```

Otherwise we need to rephrase this and establish a set of rules to follow.

Author: Worked on this part a little bit. Let me know if it's now better!

Reviewer 3: Thanks. This section looks greats now.

- `./env_vars.d/`: Directory containing JSON documents, each providing a dictionary that maps strings to strings, which are understood as environment variables. The JSON documents SHOULD be loaded alphabetically, with later documents overriding earlier ones. These environment variables SHOULD be exported on environment activation. When both `env_vars.d/` and `conda-meta/state` are present, the latter is loaded last and can override the previously defined variables.
- `./activate.d/`: Directory containing shell scripts. They SHOULD be executed on environment activation, in alphabetical order.
- `./deactivate.d/`: Directory containing shell scripts. They SHOULD be executed on environment deactivation, in reverse alphabetical order.

### Pre- and post-link/unlink scripts

The `bin/` and `Scripts/` directories usually contain executables populated by the packages themselves. There are four special paths that SHOULD be handled by conda clients. For files named like `.{package-name}-{action}.{extension}`, where `{package-name}` corresponds to the package name and `{extension}` is either `sh` (Unix) or `bat` (Windows), there are four possible `{action}` values and associated behaviors:

> - `pre-link`: Executed before a package is installed / linked. Deprecated; conda clients SHOULD ignore them.

Reviewer 3: conda currently runs `pre-link` scripts. 

IMHO all of these scripts should be avoided but there are valid uses cases for all of them that do not yet have replacements. https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/stable/resources/link-scripts.html touches on this.

- `post-link`: Executed after a package is installed / linked.
- `pre-unlink`: Executed before a package is removed / unlinked.

> - `post-unlink`: Executed after a package is removed / unlinked. Deprecated; conda clients SHOULD ignore them.

Reviewer 3: I can't find anything that indicates that `conda-build` ever included these files in packages. That said conda does run these scripts if they are manually added to the environment.

Author: Folks have been adding them manually in their build scripts: https://github.com/search?type=code&q=org%3Aconda-forge+post-link

This can be used to configure behavior of the conda client performing operations on this environment. The following locations are recognized as valid configuration sources.

- `./.condarc`
- `./condarc`
- `./condarc.d/*.yml`
- `./condarc.d/*.yaml`

## Management of a conda environment

### Creating a conda environment

An empty directory `$CONDA_PREFIX` can be turned into a conda environment by creating an empty `conda-meta/history` file. The conda client MAY register this location into a central registry of environments, such as `~/.conda/environments.txt`.

The command used to create that environment MAY be recorded in `conda-meta/history`, along with the version, timestamp and details of the transaction.

### Installing packages

For each package to be installed, assuming it has been already downloaded and extracted:

- For regular (non-`noarch: python`) packages, place the contents of the artifact into `$CONDA_PREFIX`.
  - If the file contains a prefix placeholder, replace it with the value of `$CONDA_PREFIX` and copy the file.
  - Otherwise, place the file in `$CONDA_PREFIX`. Tools MAY offer settings to configure this operation (e.g. prefer hardlinks to copies).

> - `noarch: python` packages follow some extra rules. In particular, they no longer follow a 1:1 correspondence between the path in the artifact and the linked path in `$CONDA_PREFIX`. The target path depends on variables like the Python version, OS and Python ABI modes. Details are discussed in [CEP 20](./cep-0020.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `noarch: python` packages follow some extra rules. In particular, they no longer follow a 1:1 correspondence between the path in the artifact and the linked path in `$CONDA_PREFIX`. The target path depends on variables like the Python version, OS and Python ABI modes. Details are discussed in [CEP 17](./cep-0017.md).
```

CEP-17 discusses site-packages, CEP-20 is `abi3` packages which are related but limited discussion of site-packages.

Author: Oops, fixed

These scripts should be avoided whenever possible. If they are indeed necessary, these rules apply:

- They MUST NOT write to stdout, but they MAY write to `$CONDA_PREFIX/.messages.txt`, whose contents SHOULD be reported after the conda client completes all actions.
- They MUST NOT touch anything other than the files being installed.
- They MUST NOT depend on any installed or to-be-installed conda packages.
- They SHOULD depend only on standard system tools such as `rm`, `cp`, `mv`, and `ln`.

Execution SHOULD be performed in topological order. The conda client SHOULD export these environment variables for the scripts to use:

- `ROOT_PREFIX`: Path to the conda client installation root, when applicable.
- `PREFIX`: Path to the environment where the package is installed.
- `PKG_NAME`: Name of the package.
- `PKG_VERSION`: Version of the package.
- `PKG_BUILDNUM`: Build number of the package.

### Top-level `condarc` files

Environments MAY includes files in these locations which affect the behavior of the conda client performing operations on this environment. The following locations are recognized as valid configuration sources.

- `./.condarc`
- `./condarc`
- `./condarc.d/*.yml`

> - `./condarc.d/*.yaml`

Reviewer 4: Is this meant to be `$PREFIX/.condarc` rather than `./.condarc`? The latter seems to imply that conda behavior could change by changing current/working directories.

Author: Relative to `$PREFIX`, yes, I've been using this notation in other parts of the text but I'll revisit.
